# Overview

So, what exactly *is* LiteDB?

Let’s start with what the [official docs say](https://www.litedb.org/docs/getting-started/):

> LiteDB is a [simple, fast and lightweight] embedded .NET document database.

Let’s parse this:

1. Embedded - there is no client/server relationship. The database is a DLL that lives next to your application, serving your application only.
2. Document database - the primary concept is a “document,” not a “table.” We’ll see what the difference means shortly.
3. .NET - it is for .NET, and .NET only

By way of comparison, this is how [SQLite docs describe what SQLite is](https://sqlite.org/about.html):

> SQLite is an embedded SQL database engine.

The biggest similarity? Both are embedded.

The biggest difference?

SQLite is a SQL database engine. LiteDB is a document database. This is by far the biggest difference between the two.

## Relational databases vs. document databases

Without going too deep into computer science, consider how relational databases work:

- they are oriented around *tables*, each one having a *schema*,
- a schema describes how each record in the table looks like - what its properties are and which are mandatory; each field can store values of a specific data type while the schema can enforce additional constraints on it,
- records from one table can have relationships with records in other tables, and the cardinality of these relationships is enforced and protected by the database engine

With this in mind, it’s easier to grasp how document databases work:

- they are oriented around collections, which are typically schemaless,
- a collection contains *documents* that are loosely structured; the database puts few constraints on what any document can contain,
- documents can have sub-documents or refer to documents in other collections; unlike relational databases, however, document databases don’t really protect these relationships, nor do they offer multiple cardinality options (1:1, 1:many, many:many).

There are multiple additional differences, such as how the data is physically stored, that are not as important from the application programmer’s perspective. We’ll touch on some of them further on.

<aside>
💡 Wait a second, what *is* a document in this context?

The quickest way to visualize a document, at least to a developer who has called a REST API once or twice, is to look at an arbitrary JSON:

```json
{
	"id": 10,
	"title": "Feel Good",
	"artist": "Jacky Clark-Chisholm feat. Mary J. Blige",
	"published_at": "2020"
}
```

That's what we call a document when we talk about document databases. We don't mean Word documents or anything like that.
</aside>

One funny aspect of SQLite that not everybody knows: even though it’s a SQL database, it does not do strict typing. And [it’s a feature](https://sqlite.org/flextypegood.html), not a bug. Types (except integer primary keys) are more like hints, and SQLite will happily store a string in a numeric field.

It even has an ANY data type, which you can abuse however you want, and SQLite won’t complain.

What this means is that you can use SQLite as a key-value store. Or as a JSON document store. Did I mention SQLite has solid [JSON support](https://sqlite.org/json1.html)?

Nothing prevents you from using it as a document database for your application. Whether or not that’s a good idea is another thing.

<aside>
💡 For example, SQLite won’t stop you from inserting a malformed JSON into a column, whereas you don’t have to worry about that in LiteDB.
</aside>

On a certain level, the differences between SQLite and LiteDB disappear.

The reverse is not true. LiteDB does not have a full “SQL mode.”

## Comparing the main features

Let’s compare the main features:

|  | SQLite | LiteDB |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Type of database | SQL database | document database |
| Deployment | single file | single file |
| Deployment target | Desktop apps, mobile apps, embedded / edge, websites | Desktop apps, mobile apps, websites |
| ACID transactions | ✅ | ✅ |
| Indexes | ✅ (more index types than LiteDB) | ✅ (one index type only) |
| API | SQL, LINQ (via .NET libraries) | SQL (kinda), LINQ |
| Usable from | C + any language that has native bindings  | .NET only |
|  |  |  |

### Comparing usage in .NET

LiteDB is a native .NET citizen.

`Install-Package LiteDB` is all it takes to get started.

It’s hard to overstate how convenient this is.

SQLite is written in C and compiled to the native architecture.

To use it in .NET, you need a wrapper that you call from C#. The wrapper then re-broadcasts your commands using P/Invoke and stuff to break out from the managed code and talk to the native compiled SQLite binary.

As if this wasn’t messy enough, if your app is multi-platform, you’ll need a binary for each target architecture and a wrapper that can deal with them.

At any rate, you are forced to think about your long-term goals upfront. You’ll likely have to decide:

- which incarnation will your app take (CLI, Desktop, Mobile, web… ?)
- what will be the host OS (Windows only? Or also Linux, Mac?)
- what is the right tool for data access? (EF Core? Dapper? something else?)

For SQLite, two options that make the most sense to me are:

- [EF Core](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/ef/core/), if you prefer to use an ORM; has a [first-party SQLite provider](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/ef/core/providers/sqlite/?tabs=dotnet-core-cli)
- [SQLite-net](https://github.com/praeclarum/sqlite-net), which also has a minimalist ORM but won’t get in your way if you speak SQL

These concerns go away when using LiteDB. You’ll use its native .NET API without any intermediary.

<aside>
💡 Invested in the Entity Framework? At this time, LiteDB has no official provider, and the [third-party providers](https://www.nuget.org/packages?q=litedb+entity) are not production-ready.
</aside>
